Good afternoon.
Welcome to the second day of WWDC.
My name is Derek Clegg,
and I'm a Quartz engineer.
I've been working in Quartz
for quite some time now,
hence my title.
Today I'm going to talk about the new
things that we've added to Tiger to help
you as a developer do more cool stuff.
In addition,
we're going to have my colleague
John Burkey come up for the second
half to show you more about Quartz
2D and how it's actually leveraging
the Quartz Extreme part of the
system to do even more cool stuff.
And then along the way we're
going to have a number of demos.
So the first thing that you, of course,
need to remember, as we've emphasized
already in other sessions,
is that our focus in
Mac OS X is Quartz 2D.
It's no longer Quick Draw.
Quick Draw is a great technology,
served us really well for 20 years.
It's crystals going dark.
It's time to sort of move to Quartz 2D.
And so we really want you to think
toward doing that if you haven't already.
And of course, if you have done that,
we certainly want to continue supporting
you and making more and more stuff
part of Quartz 2D to help you out.
There's a special session on Friday at 2,
transitioning to Quartz 2D,
which will go into this in more
depth and help those of you
who haven't already started the
transition make the transition.
Now, I'm also not going to talk today too
much about the details of Quartz2D,
the architecture, the basic types,
how all that fits together.
There's a session that I gave
last year at WWDC that talks a
lot about all of that information,
so you can certainly pick up
the DVD and check that out.
And in addition,
perhaps more importantly,
this year we've added a lot
of really great documentation.
There's some brand new stuff that's
all about drawing with Quartz2D,
the transition to Quartz2D,
there's a full reference of all the APIs,
and there's a lot more.
So if you have any issues like that,
sort of basic understanding,
I really urge you to go
to the documentation,
it's great, and of course,
check out the DVD last year as well.
So my focus today is going to be all
the new APIs that we've added in Tiger,
sort of the new things that
are coming down the road that
you can expect to start using.
Now just though,
to give you some context,
we have a CG context,
is the basic type in Quartz2D,
that's what everything
uses to do drawing.
So CG context is sort of... I'm
going to go back to the coin
of the realm in a certain way.
It's by nature, by its architecture,
device independent.
What that means is that
you use a CG context if
you're talking to a printer,
or to the screen, or to a bitmap,
sort of the same basic type
for all of those things.
So it sort of abstracts the
drawing environment for you.
In addition, very importantly,
it's resolution independent.
Use a CG context with the
same APIs to draw to a 100
DPI screen or a 1600 DPI printer.
And in addition, it's stateful.
It maintains state for you.
It has what we call the graphic state,
which is things like the color,
what color you're going to fill shape in,
or whether your line is dashed or not,
things like that.
And most of the APIs in Quartz take
a CG context and work with that.
So what are the new APIs that
we're going to be adding for Tiger?
Well,
there are going to be some new drawing
APIs that work with CG context directly,
a new thing, a layer API,
which is sort of a more
efficient representation of
off-screen bitmap drawing,
and some new PDF input and
output APIs for those of you
who are used to using those.
Okay,
so this is sort of the list of what I'm
going to cover for the drawing APIs.
There's a lot of things,
so let's just go into
each one independently.
So the first is a new clipping API.
The idea here,
very straightforward concept.
You have a mask,
a soft mask of some sort,
and you want to use that
as a clipping region.
In the past, in Panther,
clipping was always sort of path based.
You could clip to a circle
or clip to rectangles or to
a much more complex path,
but it wasn't very easy to
do a clip directly to a mask.
So we've added API in Tiger to
let you clip to a mask.
And it works just like
every other clipping region,
clipping in Quartz.
It's intersected with the
current clipping region.
It obeys G-save-G-restore semantics.
So in that respect, it's identical.
It's just that now you sort of get
the power of a soft mask for your
drawing operations in addition
to sort of the standard clip path
concept that we've already had.
So we think this will be very useful
for certain people who need to be
able to do this type of operation.
We've also added some new path APIs.
And the idea,
the sort of the overarching theme of some
of the things we're going to be talking
about is make simple things simple.
Quartz is a very, very powerful API.
It has lots of things available in it.
But the problem is that
sometimes a little bit,
the water gets deep really fast.
It's hard to know where
to start sometimes.
We've had people say, well,
if I want to draw a circle,
I have to learn about Bezier
paths and cubic equations.
And I don't know what to do about that.
So that's a bad thing.
We want to make it easy for
people to do simple things.
So one of the goals for some
of the APIs we've added is make
simple things even simpler.
So for Tiger,
we're adding APIs to let you do circles
just directly without having to sort
of worry about Bezier paths and so on.
Of course, ellipses are just a
variation of a circle.
We've also added APIs to let you
do lots of lines stroked very,
very rapidly.
And you'll see a very good demo
of how that's used a little bit
later when John comes up to talk.
But of course,
we want to keep simple things simple.
But we also don't want to neglect
people who have more advanced needs.
And so one of the things we've
added for paths is hit testing.
So you can find out if a
point is inside a path.
So you can do, you know,
you want to drag.
Oh, yay.
And also, those are some of the
advanced developers.
And also, we want to be able to allow you
to replace the current path with
a stroked version of the path,
again,
for hit testing or for special shading,
stuff like that.
Now again, along the same theme of
keeping simple things simple,
we've added some APIs to let you
get access to some of the basic
fundamental color sync color spaces.
Color sync has sort of three
fundamental color spaces,
the generic gray, generic RGB,
generic CMYK.
And it used to be in Panther sort
of difficult to get access to these.
You'd have to sort of go to color
sync and muck around in color sync,
come back to core graphics,
muck around in core graphics,
and after you've done
all that mucking around,
you finally, oh look,
you've got a color space.
So what we've done is made it very,
very simple to get access to the
color space without having to go
through all of that sort of gyration.
And that way you can guarantee that you
can easily get a color space that gives
you high fidelity color everywhere.
Now that's important because our
future direction is high quality color,
high fidelity color
everywhere across all devices.
We are no longer trying to model sort
of the device idea where you get a
different color if you're printing versus
a different color versus on your monitor.
We want to make sure that you get a high
quality match color everywhere you go.
To that end,
we want you to avoid using device
color spaces and to help you with that,
we're actually going to replace the use
of device color spaces automatically
for you with the generic RGB,
generic gray, and so on.
So that even if you don't
care too much about color,
and a lot of people sort of are
willing to sort of let the system
handle a lot of that for them,
you'll still get the same
results on all monitors,
on all printers,
without actually having to do
anything very difficult yourself.
Now an example of how easy it is
though to transition to use the sort
of not used device color but instead
use the more specific color spaces.
In the case of the
CIGI ColorSpace Create,
you might use the function
CIGI ColorSpace Create Device RGB by
its name.
It's a device color space.
The results will look different
on different output devices.
That's a bad way.
Don't do that anymore.
The good way, the tiger way,
is to call CIGI ColorSpace Create with
name and you pass in the
name of the color space,
in this case generic RGB.
So it's very simple.
Not a lot of code changes,
not much difference,
and what you end up with is a color that
will look the same across all platforms.
So this is definitely the
direction we're headed,
and so we want you to be able
to come along with us in that.
For image APIs,
we've added a number of new ways to
do image drawing and work with images,
and so I'll go into each
one of these independently.
So the first is chroma key masking.
This is, you know,
some people call this blue screen.
It's a very straightforward idea.
You have someone stand in
front of a blue screen,
and here we have two men shaking hands.
And then when you display it,
you subtract out the blue color,
and everything that was
blue becomes transparent.
So this is something that, you know,
everybody sort of is familiar
with from TV and so on.
And so what we've added in
Tiger is a simple way to create
an image and specify a key color,
the color you want to make transparent,
and end up with an image that
works just like every other image,
which has those parts transparent.
The function of CG image
create with masking colors,
and it's a very easy way
to get chroma key masking.
for your images, if you will.
In addition,
this is something that falls in the
category of making simple things simple.
It's a very obvious idea.
It fits into the previous
example we had with clipping.
CG image create with mask lets you
take an image and apply a mask to it,
a soft mask, any depth that's currently
supported with image masks,
and what you get out is a masked image.
This is something that maybe some
people are familiar with from QuickDraw.
It's definitely something
that took a lot more code,
too much code to do in Panther.
So for Tiger,
we've added a single function, one shot,
CG image create with mask,
and you get exactly this effect.
Very powerful, but very simple as well.
Good.
We're adding it for you.
Another API to help work
with images in certain cases,
particular cases,
is the idea of a sub-image of an image.
This is a pretty common idea if you
maybe have cached some complicated
drawing in a single bitmap,
and perhaps you want to use
that different regions of that
bitmap for different drawing
as you're doing your work.
And here we imagine an example
where someone's drawing a font,
maybe it's for their cache,
and they have nine letters,
and what they want to do is sort
of pick out each one independently.
So there's a now new function,
cgImageCreate with image in rect.
You start out with an image,
and you choose a rectangle,
and what you end up with is
an image that works just like
every other image in Quartz.
It's just a piece of that parent image.
The nice thing is that all of these
sub-images sort of share the same parent,
so you're not making
copies of all the data.
You can keep it all in one place.
So that's a very powerful
API for those cases.
Thank you.
And then finally with images,
again this is something that we
really want to make much easier.
Bitmap context,
we've told people in Quartz 2D,
if you want to do off screen drawing,
if you want to do some
sort of caching like that,
use a bitmap context.
Later we'll tell you about something new
that's even better than bitmap context,
but there are still cases where it's
appropriate to use a bitmap context.
And you do your drawing in the
bitmap context and we just sort of,
you know, blithely say, "Oh,
and then create an image from it
and draw with that image." And it
turns out that's a lot of code.
It's not so simple.
And particularly it's not so simple
to sort of make sure the color
spaces match your destination
and all that sort of stuff.
So what we've done for Tiger is added one
function that does all that work for you,
CG bitmap context create image.
You pass in a bitmap context
and out pops an image from it.
So it's very simple now to sort
of do what we've always just
waved our hands about in the past.
This is a very powerful function,
but the thing you need to remember
is that it is a copy operation.
Now that's not as bad as it sounds,
but it's a copy operation because
CG images must be immutable.
We expect that an image
will be reused -- or rather,
excuse me, we expect that a CG image will
be uploaded to video RAM once.
And then every time that
image is drawn multiple times,
we don't reupload it.
That saves a huge amount of traffic
through the bus to the video card.
If your image is changed,
then we can't do that.
We have to reupload every time.
So we're enforcing -- it's
always been true in the past,
but we're enforcing now the concept
that a CG image must be immutable.
So that's something that's very important
for you to check out in your application.
Make sure that you're not doing
something where you're changing
the context of an image.
Because if you start doing that,
then your hardware acceleration
will really suffer.
Now, when I say it's a copy operation,
it's not really a copy.
It's a copy and write.
It uses the, you know,
VM magic of Mach to copy and write.
So you don't actually really make a copy.
Instead,
you have two things that point to
the same in-memory destination.
And if anybody writes on one of them,
then a copy happens.
But until something is written,
then nothing -- you don't get a copy.
You both share the same
underlying data structures.
So that's really useful because
you can sort of create an
image from a bitmap context,
draw it somewhere, release it,
and you actually have
never made a true copy.
Another thing that
we're adding for images,
this is again sort of more
of in the advanced category,
is what we call deep pixel support.
This is deep in the sense that it's
now floating point pixels for both
image content and for bitmap context.
So we already support in Panther the
standard integer formats,
you know, one to, well actually up to 32,
one to 32 bits per pixel, sorry,
bits per component.
For Panther,
we're now letting you specify
a 32-bit floating point value,
and the floating point value can be,
you know, you can have red, green, blue,
alpha as your floating point values,
you can see in YK floating point.
Pretty much anything that we
currently support in integer,
we also support in floating point.
Same thing for output.
For bitmap contexts,
you can create a floating point
bitmap context that you might use.
Now the--excuse me.
The--the
The advantage to this is that now for
image formats that are starting to come
online where you're actually bringing in,
you know,
more of these higher resolution images,
we now can support those natively.
Now, the other thing that's important
to note is that this is not sort
of high dynamic range imaging.
That's a very specialized thing.
It's used in,
it's sort of more a color sync,
color science type thing to sort
of figure out how to map your big
floating point range to sort of visible.
That's a problem that's best
left to the color sync guys.
There's a special session on that.
Where they talk about that more in depth.
What we do is something very simple.
We just take the values
between zero and one,
and that becomes the image.
Anything less than zero,
we clamp to zero.
Anything greater than one,
we clamp to one.
So we're not actually mucking
around with the data ourselves.
We let you do that or color sync do that,
other parts of the system
that are more capable.
Excuse me.
Now another thing that we have had sort
of missing in the past is image I/O,
input and output of image data.
As you know, some of you we've been
able to support as input,
JPEG natively, PNG natively,
into Quartz 2D.
Raw image data is sort
of a big buffer of red,
green, blue alpha data,
not encoded in any
particular file format.
For output, we haven't had a way to
do any image outputs.
Of course,
we've been able to output PDF files,
which are tremendously
rich and complicated.
But for something like
a simple JPEG output,
nothing.
So for Tiger, we want to remedy that.
In Tiger,
we're going to add support for JPEG, PNG,
TIFF, GIF, JPEG 2000,
a bunch of other formats supported by
QuickTime and other formats as we need.
Of course, obviously as well,
the floating point types, excuse me,
the floating point formats such
as OpenEXR and the floating
point version of TIFF for output.
In the WWDC build,
we support JPEG and TIFF output,
and we're going to certainly
add more of those to come
for the final Tiger release.
There's going to be a session
that talks about some of this
and combines it with the previous
topic of high dynamic range on,
looks like on Wednesday.
So if you're interested in
more details about that,
certainly go to that session.
I'm going to go a little bit
into sort of an overview of the
APIs and cover them briefly.
So there are two types.
There's a way to get images in,
a way to get images out.
The way to get images
in is a CG image source.
That brings data into the system
and in some particular file format
we decode it for you and draw it.
So you can bring images, obviously files,
if you have a JPEG file, a URL,
a raw data buffer similar
to what we already support,
just a big wad of JPEG or
TIFF or whatever that you
might have mapped into memory.
And of course we support the
standard CG data provider,
which is the way you get information
into Quartz 2D typically.
What an image source does
is it creates CG images.
So you create an image source from
a file and out pops a CG image.
Now not all image file formats
are just single images.
Some are multiple like
JIF files have animations.
We'll have multiple images for that.
JIF files may have different
images for different resolutions.
So we support,
from an image source you can
also sort of get all of the
images in the image itself,
in the file format, the file data itself.
Plus you can get access to the metadata.
So if your camera,
were to embed its make in the file,
then we would be able to return, oh,
this is a Canon camera.
Or if it had longitude and latitude,
we could return that.
So you can get access to the
metadata very easily as well.
But the most important point about the
CG image source and what it creates is
that this will be the best and fastest
and the primary way we're going to be
supporting to draw images in Tiger.
That means all parts of the system
are going to go through this.
We're putting lots and lots
of emphasis on optimizing,
doing all the vectrics and so on.
And so it's very important that this
be the primary way we get images drawn
and that we have the best and fastest.
And so it's worth looking
at from that perspective.
Of course the higher level
frameworks will also adopt this
and sort of use it indirectly.
But if you're sort of
working at the core 2D level,
it's definitely worth looking into.
For output, sort of the opposite.
Basically the same.
You can output to a file, to a URL,
to raw data buffer memory.
You can output to CG data consumer,
which is a standard way
that you can output.
You can output to things in Quartz 2D.
And similarly to the input,
when you create an image destination,
you supply CG images and
you can supply metadata.
And of course, if your image format
supports multiple images,
you can supply multiple images
and write out the result.
So then you can write out a
TIFF file from CG or you can
write out -- or Quartz 2D,
you can write out a JPEG and so on.
So just to give you a quick demo,
I'm going to
I have to say up front that this demo,
like all types of demos like this,
is a little bit trivial because
we're supporting a new file format.
Hard to demo that tremendously well,
but I'll do what I can.
We have a simple app here.
And notice that here we have a TIFF file.
And uh-oh, this is Panther.
We can't drop it in because
Quartz 2D doesn't support TIFF.
So now we're going to turn on Image.io.
And now the TIFF file is accepted.
Hooray!
So that's very important.
The power of Image.io.
Now just as an additional thing,
this is a simple example of pulling
up the metadata from this file.
In this case, it has a bunch of fields,
things like the height
and pixels and so on,
the file size, the color model and so on.
There's a lot of information
like that that will be embedded
in images that you can pull out.
Again, a very trivial example
of getting the metadata.
Then just to tie it into the
previous topic about color spaces,
notice that this image doesn't actually
have a color space associated with it.
We're not using a color space.
But when we start using generic RGB,
it doesn't change.
Why?
Because in Tiger,
we're automatically making sure
that anything that's untagged
gets tagged with generic RGB.
So you get the same fidelity
across all platforms.
And then just as a simple
example to prove that there
really is something going on,
this is a specialized color
space which swaps blue and red.
And as you can see,
now you have a very odd,
maybe sick ladybug.
Okay.
So that's the demo of that.
Okay, so what else have we added?
Let me get some water and I'll tell you.
Okay, another thing that's very
important and is very powerful is,
of course,
the resolution independence in Quartz 2D.
The fact that, you know, any resolution,
any output,
any scale factor looks just the same,
looks just as good as
other scale factors.
Now, it's not surprising that, of course,
you know,
down the road we expect monitors
to change in resolution.
And we also know that people who are
currently disabled use resolution,
the scale factors to do,
to zoom up their UI so they
get some better ability to
look at the content and so on.
And the thing that we are very,
very focused on is making sure that in
all those cases it still looks great,
so that your app still looks
just as beautiful as it does
today on the current monitors.
That's an very important thing.
Now, that means that you need to actually
sort of play with the idea that
your application may be scaled,
may need to zoom up and so on.
What that means sort of on a
technical level is that we'll
set up the context for you.
The CTM will be set up so that the scale
factor will be built in to the context.
So you don't actually have
to worry about that too much.
But that means you do have to worry
about it in that you can't undo that.
If you undo it,
then suddenly you're not drawing
at the right scale factor,
you're drawing at some other scale.
And everything's going to look like,
you know, bad things on the screen.
So what that means is that we don't want
you to sort of undo the transformation
by -- this is a little bit technical
-- but taking the CTM and inverting
it and concatenating it back to
pretend like you're an identity.
Don't do that,
if you understand what I'm saying.
If you don't, good.
And instead,
we really think that it's important
to consistently use gsave,
grestore.
That's a standard way to
save the graphic state,
restore the graphic state.
We spent a lot of effort in Tiger.
We're optimizing the gsave,
grestore operation, so it's very cheap.
And so we think that that's
the right way to do it.
And it sort of will save you once we
do get down to the road where we are
going to start scaling the applications.
All that said, there are still some cases
where you really do need to
know what pixels am I touching.
If you want to draw a thin line,
for example, and you don't want it to
straddle a pixel boundary,
or you need something to exactly
abut against something else,
those things do happen
where you sort of need that.
And to help you with those cases when
you may have a scaled up user interface,
we have sort of a big workhorse function,
CGContext.getUserSpace.DueDeviceSpace.
Transform.
That is the full transform from the
current user space that you're drawing
in all the way down to the pixels,
to the actual pixels
that you're working with,
the device space.
Now, often you don't need
something so heavy weight,
so we have some key
convenience functions,
a function that will take
a point in user space,
convert it to device space, to pixels,
take that point in pixel space,
convert it back to user space.
And we have similar functions
for sizes and rectangles.
As an example, a simple example of
how you might use this,
here we have somebody who wants
to do some sort of specialized
rounding in device space,
where they really want to round to the
middle of a pixel or something like that.
So they have a point in user space,
they call
CGContext.ConvertPointToDeviceSpace,
that converts that point through
the current transformation matrix
all the way down to pixels.
They do their alignment
the way they want,
and then they take that point,
convert it back to user space,
and now when they draw with it,
they know that what will come
out will be precisely aligned.
So for those special cases
where it's important,
this is a very powerful API.
In general, though,
we think that you'll be
just fine using the standard
Quartz2D things for scalable UI,
but in the certain cases
where it's necessary,
this will help you out.
Now, let me give you a quick demo of
scalable UI and how it works with apps.
Some of you may have seen this
yesterday in Peter's talk.
So we have-- many of you are
familiar with Quartz Debug,
very powerful tool for development.
And we have now a user
interface resolution slider.
So you can change the slider,
and you'll get a different
resolution for your application.
So for example, here we might-- let's say
we'll go up to two times,
and let's launch Safari.
You see Safari is twice as big.
Now you can do this with your app too.
You can take your app, change the slider,
and see what happens when you show up,
when you bring it up on screen.
It should have brought up Apple.com.
Maybe they're announcing something else.
Who knows?
But the point here is that notice
how Safari looks really good.
It's still as high quality as it was
when it was at a lower resolution.
The text looks great.
All of the drawing and so on looks great.
So this is something that will help you
out to make sure that your application
doesn't have any problems with rendering.
As you can see, there are some issues,
like up in the upper right-hand corner.
Clearly I've changed the resolution,
but nobody told the
clock or the sound bar.
And I would show you some other apps
where it doesn't look this good at all.
But that would be embarrassing,
so I won't.
So make sure your app
is not one of those.
Whoops.
Let's see.
Safari is not quitting.
I'll put it here.
And the other thing to remember
is to make sure that you quit the
OK, we can switch back.
Make sure you quit that app,
otherwise everything will launch too
big and that's difficult to read.
Okay,
so that's sort of a lot of the things
we've added so far for drawing,
for new ways to do drawing,
better ways to work with CG context,
better ways to work with
images and paths and so on.
So now we're going to talk about a layer,
which is a new thing we're
adding for Tiger to help out.
It's really designed to sort of help
optimize the traditional case of where
you want to do off-screen rendering,
but you still want it to
be hardware accelerated.
In the past, what we've done is said, oh,
if you want to do some sort
of off-screen rendering,
just create a bitmap context,
draw into that,
and then take the result and
composite it to your destination.
It's a good way to do caching,
and it's a very powerful and
very straightforward thing to do.
The one problem, though,
is that the data always lives
on your side of the bus,
essentially, right?
It's all sort of in your address space.
So any drawing you do there,
which you then try to draw onto, say,
the video card, will have to be uploaded.
That's not efficient.
And by design,
by the bitmap context design,
it's not efficient.
It's sort of limited to that.
So CG layers are sort
of an optimized version,
sort of a better way to work
with sort of do this type of
bitmap context type caching.
Now, the key thing, too,
is that in addition to just sort
of being a convenient way to
sort of do off-screen rendering,
when you create it,
you specify a reference
to another context.
And what we'll do is we'll sort of
set up the layer that we created.
So that's what we'll do.
So we'll create a reference
to another context.
So that sort of matches
the destination context.
For example,
it will match the color space.
So that means you don't really need
to know about the color space of
the context you're working with,
for example,
the screen color space or so on.
Instead, we'll sort of create that,
set that up for you.
So when you draw onto the layer,
what will happen is that it will
already be matched to that color space.
So when it's actually finally used,
you don't have to do a separate match.
So it makes sure that things
stay highly efficient.
And you can sort of think of it,
it's really in many ways sort of like,
you know, as this example shows,
just like a rubber stamp in some sense.
You can take the layer, you draw into it,
and then you can sort of use
that over and over and over.
Here, for example, we've created a layer,
we've drawn the butterfly into it,
and now we can just use that.
And what's great is if the layer
is hardware accelerated so that
it's already up on the card,
when that stamp happens,
none of that comes back over to the CPU.
Instead, that's all done on the GPU.
So that's very,
very efficient and very high powered
for those types of cases where you
need to do sort of off-screen caching
and you don't want to have things
sort of live on your side of the bus,
as it were.
So like I mentioned,
we sort of imagine that one common use,
probably the majority, will be caching.
So you would use a layer instead of a
bitmap context for off-screen caching.
Another one,
which may be a little bit less likely,
is sort of a buffering where
you might be in the middle of
a screen update on this side,
so you can go ahead and start
drawing into a layer so that the
next time you get a chance to
composite to the destination,
you're ready to go.
That might be a little
bit less common use.
So short demo.
We'll go back to my little app.
So here we have our app again.
And here's a PDF file.
Very nice PDF file,
but it's got a lot of data and
it's a slow thing to render.
Now, if I wanted to animate that,
I would be fired because
this is not really animation.
This is sort of chunky blobbyness.
So instead, of course,
obviously what you want to do,
in Panther we would have said, oh, well,
to solve this problem,
create a bitmap context.
Very good.
Solves the problem for Panther.
The problem, though,
is of course that's not
hardware accelerated.
For Tiger, you can create a layer.
And what this does is it will
draw the PDF file into the layer,
and then the layer is
now hardware accelerated.
So when we do animation,
it's going to be completely smooth.
It's all hardware accelerated.
Everything looks beautiful.
Now the thing to remember, of course,
is that it's still in some sense bits.
So if you think about it,
it's not the original high resolution
PDF file that if you scale up,
you'll get perfectly beautiful
results at any scale factor.
You will start seeing perhaps
some sort of image artifacts
if you were to scale up this
particular layer because it is bits.
But in many cases,
for something like this,
that doesn't make any difference.
You don't care about that so much.
You just simply want
to have high quality,
fast, efficient rendering.
There's Safari still.
OK.
So that's that demo.
So that's a lot of the
APIs for both drawing content,
for high efficiency off-screen rendering,
and now we wanted to also add
some stuff for PDF support.
As you know, PDF is the metadata
file format in Mac OS X.
It's our high fidelity
rendering of drawn content.
It's a great format.
It works really well for us.
The problem is that sometimes people
have trouble sort of both in the
creation side they want to do more
things and on the sort of input side
where they want to really look and
introspect more into the PDF itself.
So we've added some APIs to help do that.
So let's go through those.
The first is links and anchors,
very comparable to HTML.
Again,
it works just with a PDF context that
is able to record this information.
And you can do sort of the basic stuff
you can do with links and anchors.
You can specify a URL and say, well,
when somebody clicks on that
point in the PDF page 17,
I want you to open up this URL in Safari.
So you can do that.
And then, of course,
the anchor type model where you can say,
well, if I click here on page 47,
go back to page 8 or
go forward to page 75.
So you can sort of do forward
and backward references.
And it's a very simple API.
It's very easy to use,
but it gives you a lot of
power to sort of preserve that.
And, of course,
Safari will be using this in Tiger to
preserve links and anchors when they
actually go to print from Safari.
In addition, for creation,
a lot of times people have
wanted to create encrypted PDF.
This follows the PDF specification
published by Adobe,
works with a PDF context,
and at creation time,
you specify a password,
or more than one password,
and the permissions
associated with the passwords.
So you can sort of say, "Well,
for this password,
don't let them print the file,
or don't let them copy anything
from the file." For the WWDC world,
we support 40-bit encryption,
and of course,
we expect to extend that up to, I think,
128, which is part of the
standard in PDF for Tiger.
Okay, so that's sort of output,
so new things you can do with output.
For input,
what we've added for Panther was
something really powerful.
It lets you sort of introspect
about the document structure.
A PDF file, you can think about it as
a giant tree of objects.
And you can use the APIs that
are available in Panther to
sort of walk through that tree
and look at all the content.
The one problem is that
the real meat of the file,
the actual content stream for the page,
which said, you know,
draw this circle here and put this
text here and draw this circle
here and put this text over here.
It was just sort of a big black box.
You could look at the content,
you could print it out,
but you couldn't actually
interpret all the pieces of it,
unless you wrote a parse yourself.
A little bit less, I don't know,
a little bit less
attractive for most people.
And in fact,
it's not something you can just
sort of read either and sort of
figure out exactly what it all meant.
So for Tiger,
what we've added is a new way to take
the content stream itself and parse
through it and call your functions back
for each operator you're interested in.
So that way you can
really take for this page,
look at all the pieces
of the PDF file and get,
essentially sort of blow up in
the whole file so you can look
at every bit in the file itself.
Oh good, glad you like it.
It's very easy to use.
The idea here is that for each
operator you're interested in,
you supply a callback function.
You can do it for none,
you can do it for all of them,
and we'll just run through it through the
content stream itself and call you back.
Here's an example.
Again, a very simple example.
The idea here is you create an
operator table where you specify
both the callback function and
the operator you're interested in.
In this case,
we're imagining that someone
wants to look at the BMC operator,
the begin marked content operator.
Who knows why, they just want to do that.
You create the content stream, of course,
from the page.
That's new as well,
where you can get the content stream out
of the page and create a CG PDF scanner.
That takes a content stream
that you're interested in,
the operator table with your callbacks
and an optional info parameter,
and you call CG PDF scanner scan.
That will parse through all the PDF,
do all the mucky work inside,
parsing and so on,
and call back your function.
So each time it sees a BMC operator,
it calls you with the arguments
on the stack for the BMC op,
for the sort of the BMC op
that you're looking at.
You can do what you might want to do.
Maybe you're counting the number of
times they appear or something like that.
When that function returns,
when CG PDF scanner scan returns,
the full content stream has been parsed.
So now you're done.
You release the scanner,
you clean up after yourself,
and you now have the
information you want.
So it's actually very simple to use,
doesn't require a lot of work,
and you can do really
powerful things with it.
For example,
this is what we use inside of
Quartz 2D to do both all of our
PDF rendering and the text extraction
and so on that's part of preview.
So we use this in two
very different ways,
but again, it's very powerful with
just very simple API.
In addition for Tiger,
we now have a new thing called PDF Kit.
There's a special session devoted to it.
This is a little bit higher level.
It's actually what Preview uses
now to do all of its PDF rendering.
It lets you do things
like do two-up drawing,
do one-up drawing, do text selection,
and so on, all in your own application.
It's a cover for a lot of
complicated functions that Preview
used to only be able to do,
but now you'll be able
to do with PDF Kit.
That is something you want
to do if you want to bring
PDF into your own application.
A lot of people do text selection,
searching, all that type of thing
within your own application,
and it's definitely worth attending
the session right after this
session in a different room.
Okay, so this is a lot of stuff
that we've added for Tiger.
We've added some both easy to
use and some advanced path APIs.
Of course, some new color space APIs,
lots of image support,
various ways to work with images,
floating point images, of course,
as well,
and floating point bitmap contexts.
A better way to get image
data in and out of Quartz 2D.
New layer support for high efficiency,
high quality off-screen rendering,
and also a bunch of functions for PDFs.
So that's sort of the new APIs in Tiger,
the new things you can work with.
And now John Burkey is going to come
up here and talk about Quartz 2D going
extreme and what that means for you.
Hi everybody.
I'm John Burkey.
I'm here to talk to you about
Quartz 2D and Quartz Extreme.
So before I start,
I want to sort of give you an idea of
what we're going to be talking about.
I want to talk about the architecture
enough that you get an idea of what
we're doing so you sort of know what to
watch for when you're doing your apps.
And then we're going to do some demos
so you'll see that it's real in a
lot of interesting different ways.
And then finally we'll be
talking about rules of the road.
We're ending with that because there's
a lot of very specific things we need
you to do so that your apps really,
really rock.
So let's get to it.
So Quartz Extreme for Tiger.
The big change is that 2D
is now hardware accelerated.
The thing for us that was important was
that we needed to maintain Quartz's very,
very high quality,
but we wanted to speed things up a lot.
We used the GPU when we can,
we used the CPU when we need to.
The big thing that we did to start
with before we began this project was
we analyzed a lot of applications.
What we did was we made sure
that the things that the
applications do we worked on first.
What you'll find as you get your apps
going is that basically all the things
that your typical application does
are all in hardware and all in GPU,
so you'll see a lot of speed.
That's where it will be calling out
as we talk about specific operations.
Then the less common operations,
things like stroke lines with dashes,
things like that that are less
common will be accelerating later,
if at all, because those things
will be coming up very,
very rarely.
Importantly, when I say accelerated,
I'm talking about on hardware.
The other thing we're doing though,
which I think is really exciting,
is you'll find that software
performance is actually quite
a bit higher in Tiger as well.
The reason for that is that as we've
optimized the pipeline for hardware,
we found a lot of opportunities
to continue to optimize
the software pipeline too.
I'm pretty excited about that.
And worth noting about that,
all the numbers you'll
have on screen here will be
Tiger software versus hardware.
You'll find that even
these software numbers,
as I'm saying,
they're quite a bit higher.
So here's our Quartz
Extreme architectural diagram.
And I want to just point out a
couple things just to sort of set
the idea of what we're talking about.
We remember that the three big things we
do in the Quartz Extreme engine are we
deliver 2D video and 3D to the screen.
We use the GPU and then we see this
word "surfaces," so we use hardware
surfaces to deliver video and 3D.
So focusing in on 2D,
there's just a few main concepts.
So first of all, the application,
as you know, renders into the window.
We call it the backing store,
the bitmap for the window.
And then,
it says flush.
So when we say flush what we mean
is we talk to Quartz Extreme,
the Quartz compositor,
and it flushes the content to the screen.
So what that does is it actually
talks to OpenGL and OpenGL executes
a flush in behalf of Quartz Extreme.
So focusing in then,
this is the key point here,
is that Quartz 2D up until
Tiger was using software,
it was running with the CPU.
So we were fill rate limited
by the CPU's performance.
Our CPUs are really, really great today,
we all know that,
but still compared to the
GPUs they're more limited.
Then the great thing about Quartz
Extreme was that we used the
DMA engine on the graphics cards
to do an asynchronous DMA pull
of the bits across to the GPU.
And that's been great because
we get asynchronous behavior and
the GPU is really good at this.
So we get a lot of speed as
you know with Quartz Extreme.
So, that was awesome.
But there was more to do.
The first thing that Peter alluded
to in his presentation is that
GPUs have become this other animal.
GPUs are now these amazing things
that can do these core image effects,
you know, blurs,
all these different things.
And 2D has been isolated from that
part of the capability because we've
been using it as a blitter to get
our content to the video screen.
And the other thing is that window
back and stores are very big.
So, even if the CPU was capable of
writing those pixels into this
window back and store very,
very quickly,
we still have to shovel those bits
across the bus to this screen.
So,
there's still a lot of work to be done.
And then the last thing is that the
window actually is a synchronization
bottleneck because while the CPU is
shoveling the bits into the window,
remember we're DMA flushing from
that same bucket to the screen.
And so, we don't have tearing.
They have to work.
They have to wait for each other.
And that's what we talk about
when we talk about over flushing.
So, you'll see that in each of
these cases we have solutions.
So as I've been saying,
it's all about bytes and bandwidth.
We're software rendering here,
and this is a great number.
The G5s really, really rock.
But it's five gigabytes per second,
and as we know,
there are other things for
the CPU to do on the system.
And also,
I'm using these big blocks because
we're talking about a lot of data.
Window back stores are huge,
and when you're using
a software renderer,
there's a lot to do.
And here we are with the
hardware DMA flushing.
It's 2.1 gigabytes per second,
but still we're shoveling big boxes,
you know, there's a lot to do here.
and finally the bottleneck
in the window back in store.
Here's the key point.
Look at that,
30 gigabytes per second and climbing.
The charts are all pointing
the same direction here.
You've seen those in
previous presentations.
So this is our key.
We want to focus on that.
That's our deliverer.
So, here's the punchline then.
This is our plan, right?
We want to stop using the CPU and we
want to move towards using the GPU.
The GPU,
as Peter showed in his presentation,
has a lot of pipes.
It's very, very wide.
It's very good at this.
And importantly,
by using the two together,
we can keep the GPU as busy as possible.
The GPU is a single purpose piece
of equipment for doing graphics.
So, by keeping the CPU as its pipeline,
we can keep it really busy.
So, what does this mean?
It means the backing store
is no longer in DRAM.
So where does it go?
It goes to the graphics chip.
OpenGL, we work with OpenGL to deliver
things to the hardware.
And this gets pretty interesting here.
I'm not good at clicking.
OpenGL commands are very small,
hence the small purple boxes.
That's the key point here for this
part is that we're delivering a
lot less bytes across the bus,
and this is a very optimal stream.
The OpenGL guys have worked very hard.
As you know, our gaming engines today
deliver millions of polygons,
so that's what we're talking about here.
We're using a very tight stream.
And then uploads, and this is important.
We'll be focusing on this issue a lot
as we go forward in the presentation.
Uploads are very infrequent,
and we will be working
together to ensure that.
They're much smaller than
window backing stores,
very key point, right?
The Aqua artwork, and some would fill a
quarter of a screen,
but we fill the whole
backing store with it.
So that's the point.
As we upload the artwork
across and reuse it,
we have less to do there.
Then finally, this is great,
back to the flushing bottleneck, with the
The window back in store on the GPU,
the flushes are occurring
all on hardware.
We're running two hardware with
the small commands and then all
the flushes are all on hardware.
So that whole flushing
bottleneck just goes puff.
So that's really, really great.
It's a key to our performance.
So, how does it look like?
looks pretty good.
This is pretty amazing to me.
I work with this stuff every day,
but I'm always astounded by how much
performance you can get from the system.
What's amazing is this
is still CPU limited.
As fast as I can shovel
stuff with present-day CPUs,
I can still shovel it
faster in the future.
And what you'll see then as you
test it yourselves is you'll see
that performance will scale more in
hardware as your CPU gets faster.
So we have numbers where the alliance
performance scaled between my
PowerBook and the G5 number that's here,
it scaled by like 3 or
4x when I went to the G5,
and it only scaled by 2x,
the sort of the CPU normal number.
So I think it's really interesting.
I want to call it a couple things.
This is about fill rate here.
The point here is that
with the big rectangle,
we're not limited by fill rates still,
so we're really, really fast.
That's important because this is what
we do first when we render a window.
We fill it with stuff.
So that's important.
Text rendering is very important.
There's been a lot of discussion
on the net about that,
and I just wanted to call it out.
We're really working hard on this.
We actually spent a lot of man
months on making this great,
and we're basically almost
breaking 5 million here.
here, so that's really great.
And then lines,
this is something we'll be
talking about today in detail.
We have a new API to really make
that easier for you to deliver a lot
of line performance on your machine.
So, sort of defocusing here,
stepping back one step,
here's PDF rendering,
which is a user of the core primitives.
And what you see here is that there's
two documents here and two different
ways of rendering the same documents.
On the top of the screen is
a core graphics benchmark,
and we're getting about 2x,
2.2x with that.
We're getting the same values below,
they're about twice as fast,
a little bit less, but quite a bit slower
when it's in preview.
And that's okay because preview
is an application that has
to do annotations and stuff.
You know, some of us are speed freaks,
but there's a lot of really great value
that's delivered by the higher end apps,
so it's not always about that.
Also, I wanted to point out that,
I'll move on, I don't remember.
So anyway, application resizing,
this is a very interesting
slide for those of you who are
focusing in on the numbers.
So see the red,
this is something that we're using
as a reminder for you when we go
into the rules of the road section.
So we have lots of speed here,
but it's sort of varying,
and sometimes the blue line
is the hardware number.
It's actually slower.
So this is the thing,
is some of these applications aren't
caching their image refs still.
We all work together at Apple,
but we're all still pitching in.
We're not shipping Tiger yet.
So we thought it was great to
show you some of these cases
where our apps are slower too,
and to call this out.
And I'll have a demo
that explains this too.
So again,
you see the number on the bottom,
text edit is crazy fast.
That's frames per second.
You actually have to turn off
beam sync on your monitors to
even take this measurement,
'cause it's just a big
flickery craziness.
I'll show you that in a minute,
it's pretty neat.
So the key is, is as we move forward,
you'll start to experience more
and more of this performance,
because as I showed you, the benchmarks,
the core primitives you're
actually using are fast.
So this is great, I think.
This means we can deliver,
and this is my experience in bringing
apps up and looking around the system
and what they're bottlenecked on.
We should experience 2X across the
board with GUI performance for Tiger.
So, yeah, can I have demo machine?
Not that one.
Okay, so.
For the first one,
I'm just going to show you
a little finder performance.
That's pretty fast.
It looks good.
And then here's a little-- make sure,
yeah, good.
Here's a little even faster.
So that's all good.
There's a lot of light little demos.
Just started to give you a flavor
for what we're talking about.
Here's Safari.
So it's getting pretty fast.
I'll show you here with it off.
You'll see that it's still fast,
but it's a little slower.
This number is about 1.5x,
and so we're pretty happy
with that for where we are.
Here's one of the flickery crazy ones.
Let me make sure I'm set here.
So that number,
you can actually-- one of the
guys on the team taught me this.
You can measure by the amount of
tears you see what the frame rate is.
But we're looking at around 200 here,
so that's really great.
This is an interesting one.
Actually, did I do that right?
So here's a Java app,
which is cool because--
They just told me they were
doing this little demo,
and so we grabbed it to
see what it looked like.
It's kind of cute.
What it does is it tries to render as
many balls and keep the frame rate at 30.
So you can see...
With hardware, with this great G5,
we can do 432 balls per second.
It's a new benchmark
number of balls per second.
Great.
But now when we turn on hardware,
This is actually with no
code changes from them.
They're still-- I'm working with them to
crank up their pipe a little bit more.
I still got beam sync off,
so that's why it's a little hairy.
But anyway, we'll keep going.
So it should float up there
about 3x of what software was.
That's really great.
Is there quite a-- there's quite
a deep pipeline here to get the
code from Java all the way down.
That's pretty sweet.
So here's our friend the wireframe.
This is an important demo to us because
this is something Joseph Marr has been
using for quite a few years to talk about
performance in Quick Draw and Mac OS 9.
And part of our message to you is
we take this very seriously when
you tell us that you need better
performance in these areas so that
you can switch over to Quartz.
So this is a big deal for us.
So you can see already with
Quartz software performance,
things are looking great.
1.3 million on a G5,
that's pretty damn amazing.
And then...
[Transcript missing]
Okay, so this is sort of
back to kind of pseudo,
this is going to get us
into the rules of the road,
so pay attention to this one
in sort of a different way.
Let me make sure I do this right.
Okay, so software, hardware, really,
really great.
That number's like 20x.
And then, oops.
Now, so what about this?
This is strange behavior.
This is hardware with no caching.
Look at that frame rate.
Woo!
So this is our first example of how
we need to be compliant with our API.
The good news is there's
not a new message here,
just we actually need you to be
compliant now so your app rocks.
So here's scaling performance.
G5s do great.
That's three times
higher than my PowerBook.
That's nice.
So here's hardware.
Woo!
So-- all right.
Back to slides.
[Transcript missing]
Caching.
This is the important thing.
This is sort of a typical command
stream you just saw go by.
It contains some commands and contains
some resources to be uploaded.
We're just showing this cute little
picture of a resource being cached.
So now we light it up because
we're going to reuse the resource
and see it was all little blocks.
That's the technical term.
And what we want to focus on is
making lots of little blocks.
So we want our resources to be cached.
We want to reuse our resources.
And here's another one.
So, you know, the point is,
this is the kind of behavior you'll see.
A lot of the things you'll be doing,
there'll be a nice clean command pipe,
and then the idea is that rarely
you'll be also doing resource uploads.
So using vramdiv room.
This is actually, I think,
a nice simple story for you.
Everything is automatic.
All you need to do is use
the retain release semantic
that's in core foundation.
And if you do that,
what you're doing is volunteering to
be a part of our caching strategy.
Importantly,
what you're not doing is volunteering
to have all of your images
put on the card all the time.
What we'll do for you behind the
scenes is dynamically take care of that
to make sure that we're not putting
too much up there or too little.
So that takes away that
worry that you have of,
oh, I've got to retain just the right
amount so that my app doesn't freak out.
What you need to do is just
retain all your image refs,
all your pattern refs,
all your color refs,
all the things you're using.
And again, that's how we know,
because we can see that.
And we can see the hardware you're on.
And what we'll do is
take care of the rest.
So in a typical picture, here's Finder.
We have images and patterns.
Text, lines, rectangles,
these are the primitives
that I gave the numbers on.
In a typical case,
that will be everything on the screen.
We'll take care of everything there.
We refer to that as a visual working set.
The idea here is that you have this
set of resources you'll be using and
those will sort of stay cached for you.
So, rules of the road.
This is the big one, cache your refs.
This isn't exactly how
it would look for you,
but you get the point, right?
Here in the first top part,
we have a loop,
and every time through the
loop we do the cheesy thing,
bad thing, which is make an image ref,
render it, and then release it.
Don't do that.
Instead, some port in your code where
you're loading your images,
whatever you're doing,
create your images, hold onto 'em.
That's your cache.
Your cache is to hold refs.
Your cache is not to hold bits.
If you want to hold bits, that's fine.
Just hold the rest with them.
And then, as many times you want
to render the image,
render the image.
Just don't do what you
did up above there.
So layers, great new strategy.
They're hardware accelerated
bitmaps and bitmap contexts.
They're very easy to use.
The key point is, again, they're dynamic.
We'll make as many of them
hardware accelerated as we can
based on the card you have,
what you're asking us to do otherwise.
And they're really easy to use.
I really like how the guys did this
because they're actually easier to use
than the old bitmap context anyway.
So these are great.
Importantly, right,
bitmap contexts always have to
go across the bus and layers will
be in hardware whenever possible.
So here's one of our
new performance APIs.
The key point here is
you see the top here,
good and bad.
This looks like nice clean code,
just that by iterating a loop like
that and giving us one line at a time,
we have to create a lot of
temporary storage to handle
anything you might give us.
With the second one here,
you tell us how big your storage is
and you give it to us all at once.
So in actuality,
with the hardware renderer,
it basically doesn't get touched
until we're ready to talk to GL.
So that's very powerful.
Here's a Rex case.
This API has existed for a while,
but we're encouraging to use it more.
Same thing, right?
Store it all at once, tell us the number,
it travels all the way
through the system.
Don't cache your caches.
This is another thing that we found
working with the operating system people.
We'll find there's a lot of caches
around for different reasons.
Rendering has changed a
lot in the last few years,
so some things are faster
than they used to be.
This is the key point.
Check your caches.
We've all got them.
And try turning them off
and see if they still help.
They might not anymore.
So that's what I'm talking about here.
Also very important,
this is an awesome session.
The Shark technology we have is one
of the best technologies that's come
out of Apple in the last five years.
This might sound silly, but really,
really,
really measure your app before you
think you know what it's doing.
It will look very different
with hardware acceleration,
number one.
And number two, as you know,
the scale of applications has
really grown in the last 10 years.
So we need to measure our stuff
and then simplify the scenario
that you're measuring until
you're sure you understand it.
Then you know what to do.
That way you're working
on the right stuff.
So this one's important to me.
I used Quickdraw for a long part of
my career and I really appreciated
Joseph Mara and Mike Brinkovich working
hard to make this run great on 10.
But here's the deal, Quickdraw,
as we're saying here,
it's too fragile and undocumented.
It's just got a lot of funny
stuff about it from the past.
Now's the time where we
all have to say goodbye.
This is the key point for us.
We're faced with this.
So if Quickdraw is rendered in a window,
we're going to turn off
hard work celebration.
So that's what we ended up with.
So, more good news.
It's really easy to turn on.
You've seen a bunch of demos here.
You have the stuff in your computer.
Command D.
It's right here and you
see that it's listed there.
Also, importantly,
only some of our products
support Quartz Extreme with 2D.
These are the ones.
The key is this fragment program stuff.
We have a very modern new
graphics pipeline and we're taking
advantage of these new features.
so we actually do need them.
So final thoughts.
First, core imaging.
It's a great new technology.
It works with us very well.
We support it as a real image.
This is the link.
It was one of those top secret sessions,
so I wanted to make sure you
saw where it was when it was.
It's actually very soon now.
This is really great, though.
You can make an image using their APIs,
and it'll be clipped with
our clipping and everything.
So it's really great.
It fits right in.
And then here's the rest.
So the whole system is now
hardware accelerated and
This enables us to do a lot
of really amazing things.
So there's going to be a lot
of great things in the future.
Here's our mailing list.
We love discussion.
And we've got documentation
from the Quartz team.
Amazing.
So we have two different documents.
A lot of people are working
really hard on these.
And this is where you can find them.
They're actually on your computers.
And I'd like to bring up Travis.
He's going to lead Q&A.